# sars_cov2_demography

Vasilarou M, Alachiotis N, Garefalaki J, Beloukas A, Pavlidis P. Population Genomics Insights into the First Wave of COVID-19. Life. 2021; 11(2):129. https://doi.org/10.3390/life11020129 

### Demographic Inference Methodology

The demographic analysis was performed in an approximate Bayesian computation (ABC) framework. ABC is a Bayesian approach that bypasses the exact likelihood computation by using stochastic simulations and summary statistics. In our analysis, we modeled the demography of the SARS-CoV-2 dataset that infected Asian, European, and Northern American cohorts. An important approximation in an ABC analysis is the replacement of the full data by a set of summary statistics. These are numerical values calculated from the data such that they represent the maximum amount of information in the simplest possible form [36]. The summary statistics were calculated from the multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of each population’s sequences by msABC and include (1) estimates of genetic diversity—the Watterson’s estimator θw and the mean pairwise differences of sequences θπ —(2) a summary of the site frequency spectrum in the form of Tajima’s D, (3) the average pairwise correlation coefficient ZnS as a measure of linkage disequilibrium, (4) two haplotype-based statistics — the number of haplotypes calculated by the Depaulis and Veuille K (DVK) and the haplotype diversity measured by the Depaulis and Veuille H (DVH)— and (5) the Thomson estimator of the time of the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) and its variance.

In order to estimate the parameters of a demographic scenario involving an exponential growth in the population size, we created simulations of neutral polymorphism data. Inferring the demographic history of one population at a time, we generated sets of 500,000 coalescent simulations using msABC [37]. In that framework, every evolutionary scenario was defined by a set of parameters and every parameter was characterized by a prior distribution (Table 1). Given the current effective size of a haploid population N0, the expansion model was characterized by two parameters: the scaled population mutation rate θ and the rate of exponential expansion α. Therefore, the population size is given by the following:

N(t) = N0 e−αt

where time t is measured backwards in time in units of 2N0 generations and θ is defined as 2N0μ for haploid organisms, where μ is the mutation rate per generation [45]. Since there was no clear evidence that recombination took place within SARS-CoV-2 genomes in humans, the population recombination rate ρ of all the simulations was set to zero. For each population, the number of individuals sampled per simulation was equal to the number of sequences in the multiple sequence alignment.

The ABC parameter inference was implemented using the R package abc. The inference procedure consists in retaining simulations for which the Euclidean distance between the set of simulated summary statistics and the observed set is sufficiently small. The percentage of accepted simulations is determined by the tolerance value, τ = 0.005. Ιn order to correct for the discrepancy between the simulated and the observed statistics due to the nonzero τ, the posterior probability of the parameters was approximated by applying regression adjustment techniques to the retained simulations. More specifically, we performed a local linear weighted regression correction to estimate the posterior parameter probabilities of the American and Asian SARS-CoV-2 populations. In this approach, the simulated parameters were assigned weights according to how well the corresponding summary statistics adhered to the observed ones and then a linear regression adjustment was performed on the accepted, weighted parameters. The parameters were “logit” transformed prior to estimation, using as boundaries the prior distributions’ minimum and maximum values that were used during the simulations for each parameter. After the regression estimation, the parameters were back-transformed to their original scale. A nonlinear heteroscedastic regression model using a feed-forward neural network model was utilized in the demographic analysis of the European population.
